Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Cri Renali. He's an
assistant professor of philosophy at VU Amsterdam, and today
we're talking about his book, The Philosophy of Indoctrination,
Epistemology, Ethics and Politics. So, Doctor Rinaldi, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Yeah, it's a, yeah, pleasure to be here as
well. Thank you so much. Really appreciate it.
OK, great. So, why do you think it's important
to study indoctrination? Why does it matter?
Yeah, it's a great question. Um, IT'S something I
still ask myself if I, if I admit, but
um, I guess that's just, yeah, what philosophers sort
of do, always trying to justify uh what it
is that we do. Um, BUT there's roughly, um,
3 reasons, so, uh, one is that we care
about education. Knowledge and our own and other people's,
you know, development as thinkers, you know, critical thinkers,
open-minded people, considerate, humble, and so on and so
forth. So we, we care about Our own and
others' intellectual development, basically. And indoctrination is widely thought
to undermine all of this, right? That, effectively indoctrination
is undermining The principles of education, um, it's somehow
inhibiting knowledge and under or understanding, rationality, um, and
the development of the intellectual self, you know, the,
the person as a critical thinker, as a humble
thinker, as a person who is sensitive to reasons,
arguments, and evidence, and so on and so forth.
So, indoctrination is thought to undermine all that, um,
but how Uh, and, you know, and why exactly
it does this is unclear, right? So just to
give you a gist of the problem, um, people
can be indoctrinated to believe what's true and indoctrinated
to deny what's false. And what's so bad about
that, right? So, um, insofar as you think that
we can be indoctrinated to believe not only what's
true, um, but also what's false and thus to
sort of Inhibit ourselves from considering seriously um what's
false, that just raises the question of what Uh,
would make indoctrination, at least from sort of like
an educational and, and epistemological point of view, uh,
a bad thing. So it kind of cries out
for explanation, and that's where an epistemologist, um, can
jump, you know, jump in and, and, and try
to give a story. Um, SO that's, that's one
reason why we should study indoctrination, um, at least
philosophically. Um, THE second reason is that. Many people
also seem to think that indoctrination, you know, just
happens when you're sort of socialized, uh, into a
community with a, with a belief system, right? Whether
it's political, religious, non-religious, or any kind of worldview,
right? So it's just sort of like part of
the natural um habituation into, you know, society. Um,
BUT then, if growing, just growing up in a
culture or society just comes with it, like certain
beliefs and values that you just can't sort of
avoid, um, if, you know, following Wittgenstein, you just
sort of swallow down these beliefs without considering reasons
or evidence for them. Then indoctrination seems inevitable, right?
It's something that is completely unavoidable. Um, BUT then
if it's unavoidable, why think it's a serious harm
or something to be concerned or worried about, right?
Um, WOULDN'T it be like the, the kind of
doxastic or, you know, cognitive version of somebody worrying
about puberty or midlife crisis or old age as
a sort of like, as, you know, things to
be avoided. I mean, that, that wouldn't really make
much sense, right? Those are just kind of normal
facts of life, so to speak. And, you know,
this story about how indoctrination is just part of
ordinary. Inculturation and habituation into a society that has
beliefs and values that makes it look like just
a part of, you know, ordinary life and not
a problem as such. And here's the thing, um,
many people still, of course, point to indoctrination as
something to be avoided, that it's wrong to indoctrinate
and that educators should, you know, try to avoid
indoctrination as best as they can. But if it's
not avoidable at all, then, you know, clearly there's
a conflict, right? So, um, part of the philosophical
study then is, you know, to tell a story
there as well. And, um, third, um, indoctrination is
a politically salient issue. And then, you know, different
points of recent history, it's, it's been politically salient
for different reasons. I mean, at least recently, lawmakers,
politicians in the US, um, and Western Europe, uh,
mostly, Um, on the right wing, um, so more
on the conservative spectrum of things, have, you know,
called for the end of indoctrination in schools and
especially universities. And so, there are charges of indoctrination
sort of clearly presupposed that there's something wrong with
indoctrination, right? That it's wrong and that it should
be avoided. And that, you know, to the extent
that our educational systems are employing indoctrinatory methods or
forms of instruction, then they're sort of corrupted by
indoctrinators, right? Um, Well, here's the thing, we can't
really assess whether their claims are true or justified
if we don't have a good grip on what
indoctrination is exactly. You know, we have to actually
know what we're talking about. Um, AND also, we
have to have a good grip on why it's
a bad thing, if it is at all, right?
And whether it really is even avoidable. Um, SO
Uh, that also makes, I think, the study of
indoctrination important because. It, you know, ultimately will help
us assess political claims a lot more effectively. And,
um, yeah, and although I think that most of
the concerns about indoctrination, at least, you know, from
a political point of view, are coming mostly from
the, the right wing and conservatives. That's not to
say that the left wing and more progressive and
liberal people are not also concerned about it. So,
you know. There's definitely charges from the left that,
you know, private religious schools are centers of indoctrination,
that uninformed parents are effectively indoctrinating their kids to
deny climate change or to deny the efficacy of
vaccines, or there's also charges from kind of more
mainstream media that people are indoctrinated to believe. False,
uh, conspiracy theories, um. So, it's, it's not just,
you know, on the right, although it, it, a
lot of the, I guess, sort of. A lot
of the airtime is given to the right when
it comes to indoctrination, um, but it's still the
case that the left and, you know, the center
and the mainstream are also concerned about indoctrination just,
um, you know, for different kinds of groups, for,
for different kinds of beliefs and, and so on.
So, yeah, I'd say these are the three main
reasons why indoctrination is important. Um, YEAH, for educational.
Epistemological and maybe even broadly democratic reasons. So, you
know, many have thought that. The point of education
in a democratic society is to facilitate not just
the, you know, ingestion of knowledge and, and understanding,
but to develop students, uh, as, as like thinkers,
right? And to, to do, to develop the, the
intellect and indoctrination, it seems incompatible with that. So
we need to spell out why all of this
is.
Right, but what is indoctrination? I mean, what does
it mean to indoctrinate someone and how should the
definition of indoctrination be approached?
Yeah, this is um. Sort of a really big
question because Yeah, part of my motivation um for
the book was just On the one hand, if
you go to. Contemporary philosophy, you don't have any
real settled definitions of indoctrination. You sort of have
A dispute, which happened mostly in the 70s. Um,
FROM philosophers of, of education about what, you know,
indoctrination is. And this is all kind of against
the backdrop of, you know, the, the cold, the
Cold War, right? Um, SO, a lot of the
data points you, you could say that we have
on indoctrination philosophically sort of comes from this discourse
from the 70s and, and, and a bit into
the 80s as well. Um, THE other data points
are from Things like religious studies, um, social psychology,
and terrorism and security studies where They don't always
mention indoctrination by name, but they have something like
indoctrination in mind when they're thinking about certain kinds
of cognitive manipulation. And sometimes they do mention indoctrination,
but they just sort of fail to kind of
give an adequate definition of what it is, right?
Um, SO, yeah, it sort of starts from those
two points that the kind of definitional, um, project
was, you know, kind of left open by the
philosophy, and the definitional project was never really properly
taken, taken up outside of philosophy, so you just
find You know, different, um, mutually exclusive, inadequate definitions
outside of philosophy, right? Um, AND then if you
go to the dictionary, the dictionary sort of actually
does a, a fairly good job compared to other
philosophically interesting terms, you know, so if you like
looked it up, looked up knowledge or justice in
the dictionary, you You know, don't really get philosophically
compelling definitions, but if you look up indoctrination in
the dictionary, it's, it's a lot better. It's something
like, um, being instructed to accept something uncritically, and
that's actually like an excellent starting point. But then
all of the interest comes in. When we start
thinking about what is it to accept something uncritically,
right? So what, what counts as uncritical, um. And
so the philosophy would still be necessary then, even
if you're starting with, say, a, a dictionary, like
a, you know, widespread dictionary definition. Um, YEAH, so
either way, we need to embark on this kind
of definitional, uh, project, and Doing this takes us.
Yeah, into different territory. On the one hand, it
takes us into this territory about just thinking about,
OK, so what should a definition of this phenomenon
look like exactly, right? So this is more of
a kind of like a meta question, right? A
question about not what is the definition, but what
do we want from a definition of this phenomenon.
Um, And the other territory is, is kind of
going over all, you know, this kind of different
literature, which often doesn't. You know, correspond with each
other, right? And trying to see what nuggets of
insight, you know, we can extract from that. Um,
OK, so with that said, what I tried to
say in the book is the given trying to
give a definition of indoctrination is actually more difficult
than trying to give a definition of other philosophically
interesting, uh, phenomena. And the reason why is because
Indoctrination doesn't, the, the term isn't just used to
describe, um, you know, certain instructional methods or processes
or ways of acquiring and holding beliefs, but they
also contain an evaluation. Of that, of the method,
process, or way of um uptaking and holding a
belief. And because there's this evaluational aspect of what
the term means. Uh, IT means that it's then
kind of latent with normativity. So, we can't then
just take ascriptions of indoctrination at face value in
the same way that we could say ascriptions of
when someone knows something, or maybe even less controversial
when something is a mammal, or, or, you know,
when, when someone, um, I don't know when something
is a fish, and so on and so forth.
Of course, all these things admit of like borderline
cases and there will be ambiguity, but Uh, what's
lacking in these cases, I mean, at least at
first blush, is something like a normative evaluation of
the phenomenon, uh, in the same breath, right? So
if I call something indoctrination, I'm not just describing
it as a kind of instructional method or process.
For getting beliefs, but I'm also evaluating it in
a negative way. It's like saying of the thing
that it's, you know, just like when you say
of something that's irrational, or that's so dogmatic, you're
not just describing the thing, the state, you're evaluating
it. Um, AND so that means when we go
to look at how people use the concept of
indoctrination, we're, we're also getting kind of like data
points on On what they consider to be negative,
right, from an epistemological or moral point of view,
right? So you might get people who If you
just swapped out the relevant views, right, would call
a certain way of getting a belief indoctrination, while
the other would say, oh, no, no, it's not,
right? So for some, it might be that your
paradigm case of indoctrination will involve, you know, fundamentalist
religious beliefs, um, and for others, it will involve
maybe, maybe, you know, more like atheistic, humanistic beliefs,
right? On a political On the political side, it
could be, and this is why I mentioned a
moment ago about how the the original definitional project
took place, you know, while the Cold War was
going on. You know, a lot of the, the
worries had to do with The American educational system.
Being too similar to something like the Soviet educational
system, right? So the idea is like, well, look
here in the West, we need to educate our
people and our students, not indoctrinate them. And so
the The paradigm, you know, so like the base
case of what indoctrination would be, would be, however
they're being educated, however they're being instructed rather, in
the Soviet Union and further back in, into um
more like fascist regi regimes of Nazi Germany and,
and, and Italy, for example, during the, uh, the
Second World War. So, all this is just to
say that Descriptions, descriptions, attributions of indoctrination, um, they
carry normative evaluations within them, and that makes ordinary,
taking ordinary descriptions of indoctrination at face value difficult
so that we don't really have a good grip
on which cases are the base cases of indoctrination
and which aren't. They're always going to be open
to dispute. Um, AND so that's something I wrestle
with a lot, uh, in the book and especially,
uh, chapter two where I try to resolve this
basically a practical version of what's called the problem
of the criterion, you know, so you want to
give a, a criterion of the thing in question,
in this case, indoctrination. Um, AND so it seems
like you should start from obvious cases of it,
right? Um, BUT in this case, our obvious cases
are questionable, right? People will dispute them for, you
know, political, ideological reasons. Um, SO that makes it
difficult to start from kind of like paradigm cases
or base cases of. In of what indoctrination is
supposed to be. So then that points towards going
towards just principles that if we get them right,
will just tell us which cases are indoctrination and
which ones, and which ones aren't. Um, SO that's,
that's one way to go. But then, One of
the primary ways of testing these principles is against
cases. Right, so let me give you an example.
Um, IF you have a principle of knowledge, which.
Says something like, whenever anyone has an opinion, it
counts as knowledge, well then, that's not gonna correspond
so well to our ordinary attributions of knowledge, right?
We'll say people who believe that 2 + 2
equals 24, well, then that counts as knowledge cause
there's someone out there who believes that, I'm sure.
But that, that won't um jive, right? It won't
correspond to our ordinary attributions where we withhold knowledge.
In that case, we'll say, no, that person doesn't
know that. 2 + 2 equals 24 because that
claim is not true, right? Um, SO we test
principles. Against cases, and, and so if what I
just said is correct that the cases of indoctrination
are themselves problematic. Um, WE, it makes it difficult
to even test the principles against the cases, right?
Because we have to have kind of agreement on
This is a case of indoctrination and not merely
some kind of ideological distortion, right? Kind of normative
confusion. So that's why the definitional project, I think,
in the case of indoctrination is especially difficult, and
this will probably be true as well for. Similar
kinds of terms like propaganda, brain brainwashing, you know,
things in the nexus of indoctrination.
Right. Um, I mean, I would like to ask
you now about the theory of indoctrination you present
in the book. You also go through some particular
views like the ideological view, the rationality bypassing view,
and the close-mindedness view of indoctrination. I mean, would
you like to tell us about your own theory,
the one you present in the book, and how
it differs from these other views of indoctrination?
Yeah, sure. So, um, Yeah, I sort of move
in the book kind of progressively towards my own,
you know, working first working through, um, why why
the dictionary definition is is inadequate, and then more
to Full-blooded philosophical theory. So I start with the
ideological view, and then I get to the, what
I call the rationality bypassing view, and then to
the closed-mindedness or dogmatism sort of view. And in
my view it's kind of a variation of, of
that. It's in that family. It's a kind of
closed-mindedness sort of view. Um, SO yeah, let me
just work through this sort of step by step
a bit. Um. OK. So, maybe where we should
start in trying to define indoctrination is just to
think about Well let's try to start with some,
some cases, right? So, Um, I guess in real
life, you know, there is Nazi Germany teaching students
in, you know, elementary school, um, biology, right? And
the way that they taught biology sort of aligned
with. Because of the Nazi perspective on racial hierarchy,
right? That, that white people, and specifically Germans are
superior to, to the rest, um. I think many
would want to say that this was uh an
instance of indoctrination. So, you know, if something has,
you know, is, is a contender for being a
paradigm case, this is as close as we're, we're
gonna get, I guess, um, in the real world,
um. OK, so like what the ideology view says
basically is that. To be indoctrinated is to be
taught. To believe a particular ideology, right? So that's
like the initial simple presentation of the view. And
I think If you think about that in relation
to this Nazi biology case, you can say like,
OK, so it would account initially for why that's
a case of indoctrination because students are indeed being
taught to believe that a particular ideology is correct,
right? Namely, that the Nazi ideology or, or way
of thinking about biologies, you know, is correct. Namely,
the one that aligns with racial. Like the supremacy
of white over non-white people. OK. The problem with
this is that it overgeneralizes, right? Because If you
just look at, I guess, the definitions of what
ideology are, at least in sort of like political
psychology, um, And, um, you know, anthropology and behavioral
sciences. Ideology is just kind of understood as something
like a body of mutually reinforcing and supportive beliefs
and values, and so, Um, everyone will have an
ideology of in this sense, right? So if you
just take your ordinary religious believer or even your
ordinary non-religious believer, I mean, they'll have some religious
or non-religious worldview or ideology, right? Um, If you
take someone who grows up in, you know, like
Western Europe and social democratic countries, they'll have a
broadly Democratic worldview might skew um agnostic or atheist,
a bit suspicious about religion, but is tolerant of
it. This also uh encapsulates a certain worldview, you
know, we might call it like enlightenment worldview, right?
OK, so I guess you can already kind of
see what the problem is, is that if this
ideology, this basic ideology account of indoctrination is correct,
then just too many things will count as indoctrination,
you know, basically it would mean that just by
getting beliefs at all, you're being indoctrinated, right, at
some point. And so it, because it overgeneralizes, it
becomes not so scientifically fruitful as a, as a
theory. Right, cause it, it will just, it'll just
call far too many cases of indoctrination and, and
so it's not a helpful way of demarcating what's
indoctrination from education, right? Or what's indoctrination from, I
don't know, you could say like epistemically good teaching
or what's the difference between um Indoctrination and education
that facilitates knowledge, right, or an intellectual self-development. So
it won't really help us to make any of
these, to answer those kinds of questions. So it
overgeneralizes. Um, OK. But there's another way of parsing
the ideological view, um, which is much stronger. So,
you could say like, OK, it's not really about
coming to believe in ideology or worldview as such,
but it's more about the way the person acquires
the worldview or ideological belief. So, there's a difference
here then between being instructed to believe in ideology
and being ideologically instructed. To believe a certain ideology
or worldview. And it's this latter thing, this ideological
instruction, which is what makes the process indoctrinatory. OK,
so, that's better. Um, BUT it raises the question,
what is it to be ideologically instructed? Well, something
like instruction that is informed by a background ideology.
Um, SO that means going back to the Nazi
biology case, it means that they were taught biology
under the guise. Of Nazi ideology, right? Or sort
of maybe not in the guise of, but. Um,
THROUGH the influence of Nazi ideology. So that Nazi
ideology is, as it were, distorting. The the relevant.
Um, BIOLOGICAL education, right? So that what the students
come to think of as the science surrounding. Uh,
RACE is not really the science in a, in
a certain sense surrounding race, but is more like
a distortion of, of the facts and the evidence,
like a certain way of interpreting it so that
it kind of fits with. Uh, THE prevailing, uh,
Nazi worldview, right? So it involves this kind of
this distortion of the evidence for what counts as
true by the ideology. So we have to spell
out what that notion is, and. One way of
doing it is just like, well, the, the ideology
perhaps is prone to represent what's false as what's
true. Um, THAT would be one way of doing
it, but. But because indoctrination is compatible with getting
true beliefs. Um, THIS would mean that then only.
Coming to acquire false beliefs would count as indoctrination.
And so if you took You know, two people
who are taught. Different views. So one is taught,
let's say, any view P and the other one
is taught the opposite, not, not P, but they're
instructed in exactly the same sort of way. This
view would count only one of them as being
indoctrinated, namely the one who got the, you know,
got the false belief. And I, and it struck
me that this was inadequate because it seems to
put all of the work into just how the
world turns out to be, you know, does the
world turn out to be such that that person's
belief corresponds to it or not? And so it's
kind of, it kind of sucks out all of
the explanatory work of the methodology, uh, that. Ideological
that ideological distortion is supposed to do in accounting
for why the methodology or process is indoctrinory, right?
So it kind of is self-undermining as a theory.
It's supposed to be a theory about how, why
a certain method or way of getting a belief
is indoctrinatory, and it turns out that, oh, it
doesn't really have much to do with the method,
it just really has more to do with what
the world ends up being like. So a better
way then would be to say, well, ideological distortion
is a matter of Distorting the reasons for the
position, sort of making it seem as though um
there are reasons for a position when there really
aren't any, or making it seem as though the
stated reasons uh really do support the view when
they really don't. So in this case, you know,
Nazi biology teachers, it isn't as though they just
Gave somehow gave students beliefs. They also presented reasons
for those beliefs um under the heading of being
the science, right, right, so it wasn't taught as
though it wasn't taught as if it were independent
of science. It was taught taught as being part
of the science so that if you're kind of
respectful of the science and appreciate what the science
says, then you should believe what they do. So
that would be the distortion then, right? Representing something
that is not science as science and thus as
having scientific evidence of a belief when you really
don't. Um, SO that does a lot better, I
think. Um, BUT it then it seems really close
to a rival position, namely this rationality bypassing view,
right? Because then it's not ideology as such, which
is kind of explaining why the case is indoctrination,
but it's more the epistemic features of the ideology
that are explaining why it's indoctrination. Namely, because it's
Misrepresenting the evidence or because it's. Making the way
um. That the learner uses the evidence, uh, somehow
improper. Um, SO, all of these features are strictly
speaking detachable from ideology, right? I could just teach
someone an individual claim that um seems remote from
ideology, you know, say like, that's a table, and
I could kind of misrepresent the evidence. I could
say like, well, here's scientific evidence for why this
is a table, but it's not really scientific evidence.
Well, then my Ideological distortion account would have to
call that. Um, I, indoctrination. Which, um, which seems
wrong, um, or at least. It sort of makes
the, the view superfluous, right, because then it's not
quite ideology which is doing anything, it's just these
epistemological features that happen also to be features of
this, you know, of the ideology in question like.
So, yeah, it becomes superfluous and it, it, it's
not something about ideology as such, which is doing
any explanatory work anymore. OK, so I know this
is long, but now we're only at the rationality
bypassing view. So it kind of takes us here,
um, as maybe the better position and I think
of this view is sort of the main rival
to the view that I favor, which is more
of a closed-mindedness theory. Um, SO I spent a
lot of time on this theory in the book
compared. To the others. So the rationality bypassing view
effectively says that to be indoctrinated is to Come
to acquire a belief that something is true or
false, but in a way that bypasses your rationality.
It bypasses your rational evaluation, it bypasses your critical
faculties. It just kind of goes around these things,
right? And I think that this view does, um,
account for some people's intuitions about what indoctrination is
supposed to be. So if you think about You
know, Alex from A Clockwork Orange and he gets,
you know, they use this, of course, it's made
up, but this Ludovico technique on him to get
him to, um, be repulsed by murder, right? Um,
ALTHOUGH it doesn't involve a conviction, you can just
tweak the case so that not only does it
cause him to be revolt revolted by murder, but
to believe that murder is wrong. So imagine, you
know, they employ this technique which sort of, sort
of like gives him these. You know, terrible images
of murder that makes him feel like just sick
and and and and everything else. Makes makes him
repulsed and we'll suppose it makes them convinced that
murder is is awful, that it's wrong. OK, so
it seems like he's indoctrinated. Why? Well, rationality bypassing
you has a great answer. Well, the way he
acquired this conviction completely went, went around his rational
evaluation, right? It just engaged his, his sort of
like, you know, emotions and, and even, uh, deeper
than that, it just, you know, engaged his, his
like kind of disgust, right? So. That doesn't seem
to involve any rational evaluation, consideration of arguments, reasons,
and so on and so forth. OK, so gets
that kind of example right. Um. OK, so all,
all is good. What's wrong then? Um, I guess
it's because this is, of course, is a fictional
example, and once we start, you know, pulling the
threads, we end up completely unraveling it, so. What
it says is that makes this example indoctrinatori is
that. The way of getting the conviction went around.
Alex, the agent's rational faculties, basically. OK. Well then.
That makes it seem like indoctrination then is something
like compelled or forced belief, right? Because being compelled
to believe something or being forced to believe it
also seems to go around. This activity, this activity
of considering an argument for a belief, this activity
of thinking about whether there's reasons for the belief
and whether these reasons actually support it or not.
Right, OK. Um, NOW, let's go back to Yeah,
epistemology, um, just consider Descartes' evil demon thought experiment
for a moment, right? In this thought experiment, we're
supposed to be like, we imagine ourselves as Descartes
or like Descartes sitting by the fire, holding a
piece of paper in our hand. And Descartes says,
well, look, isn't it possible that. As you hold
this, you know, piece of paper, book in your
hand that an evil demon, completely unbeknownst to you,
just, you know, put this, um, thought into your
mind, which causes you to assent to it. Um,
Well, Suppose that is possible, then Descartes's case would
actually be a case of indoctrination, namely the evil
demon indoctrinated us to believe, here's a book, right?
Or here's, or I have hands, or I have
a body. Here's a desk, here's a computer, uh,
and so on and so forth. It's just kind
of giving you, um, the belief, right? Um, SO,
What would basically be going on here is that
when something causes you to believe something, then you
just count as indoctrination. Uh, IT just counts as
having been indoctrinated. And so I worried here that
this also will overgeneralize because just think about your
relationship to your own sensory experiences, your own sensory
impressions. I mean, often enough they don't just They
don't prompt you to consider arguments or reasons in
favor of. That what you're seeing is vertical, but
they just cause you to believe, right? If you
open your eyes in the morning and look at
the clock and it says 7 a.m., you immediately
come to believe it's 7 a.m. You don't consider
arguments or reasons, and in fact, that seems to
be what the belief has going for it, even,
right? It's just an immediate. Um, RELATION between the
impression, this experience of seeing what the clock says
to believing. It just immediately causes the belief without
any inferential steps, no argumentative steps, no activation of
your reason. But then, just simple perception. WOULD also
count as indoctrination, in effect, by, by, by this
definition. So, it ends up being, uh, it ends
up overgeneralizing. And the reason I brought up this,
this Descartes case was Just to highlight how. Being
caused to believe something would, would count as indoctrination,
and the thing is that, well, lots of things
can cause us to believe what we do, you
know, so if you get bumped on the head
and then you end up believing, uh. Maybe you
believe something connected to it, like I was bumped
on the head, or maybe you don't. Maybe you
believe something completely as a, as a, as an
accident, a kind of fluke. You believe that it's
gonna rain tomorrow. Well, that would be a belief
that bypassed irrationality. Was, is it really indoctrination though?
You know, it doesn't seem like it. Um, SO
it seems to overgeneralize, and I could get into
some more things like thinking about like determinism and
freedom, you know, if determinism is true, then in
a certain sense, all of our beliefs are caused
by the remote past and the laws of nature,
but then every belief would count as indoctrination and
of course determinism might well be true at, at
the level of, at this level, so. Um, YEAH,
that, that, that would be bad, right? Um, OK.
Maybe a fix here is to say something like,
all right, it doesn't have, it's not just being
compelled to believe. But it's something like you need
to believe in such a way that you're sort
of reason responsive. Right, so, going back to the
Clockwork Orange example, Alex wasn't just compelled to believe,
but he's also maybe we could tweak the example
so that he's reason, he's not reason responsive, so
that if someone maybe in his old gang were
to give him reasons for believing as he used
to believe that murder is great and we should
all, you know, that it's, he should engage in
it. He wouldn't be able to con he wouldn't
be able to consider these reasons seriously, be able
to factor in, factor those into his thinking. He
would kind of be preempted from doing it, right?
He would be repulsed. Yeah, um, all right, so
I think this view, um, Has a good shot
of being. Correct, but. It runs into a difficult
question, which is that. There's sort of this ambiguity
between being reason. Unresponsive in the way you acquire
the belief. So in terms of your belief formation.
Um, VERSUS the way you maintain the belief. So,
it could be that you're a reason unresponsive in
how you got the belief, um, but you're still
reason responsive in the way you maintain it. So
let me give you an example of that. Um,
Maybe I acquire a certain belief from perception. Say
I acquired the belief that um it's raining, it's
raining right now because that's what I seem to
see. When I see some water falling down um
uh from, from above. OK, so that was in
a certain sense, reason unresponsive because I didn't like
consider reasons or anything. I just. Got the belief
Immediately through my experience. I didn't really think about
it. But I maintain it maybe in a reasoned
responsive way, so that if my wife comes in
and says, hey, I was just watering the flowers
above us, it made, I just used way too
much. Uh, I left the hose on, and yeah,
it really looked like rain. And then if I
go, oh, OK, I thought it was raining before,
but, uh, I guess it was just you, um,
you know, using, using too much water. So there
I revised my belief, um, so it was reason
responsive, so it wasn't indoctrination, right? Um, YEAH. OK.
So, that's, uh, that would be helpful. So then
we have to build in them that for it
really to count as indoctrination, it can't just be
that the way I acquired the belief was reason
unresponsive, but the way I maintained it. Um, OK,
so this is where the difficulty now comes in
for proponents of this way of understanding rationality bypassing,
is that The rationality bypassing view is supposed to
be a view, what's called a method view of
indoctrination. So method views of indoctrination, they're a family
of views which say, look, what makes something indoctrination
or not is facts about the method. Of teaching
or acquiring the relevant beliefs. All right. And so
here's the thing, to secure that the belief is
maintained in a reasoned unresponsive way, you have to
pack in a lot into the method to make
it, to guarantee or make it likely that the
belief is maintained in a reason, reasoned unresponsive way.
So how are you gonna do that? Short of
just magically causing the person. To maintain it in
a, you know, reasoned, unresponsive way. Um, YOU know,
if you have something like Descartes's Evil demon who's
constantly Keeping the belief fixed in you and preventing
you from considering reasons and alternatives, then, you know,
that could do it. But what in the real
world could do it, right? So, that was just
one kind of like open question for the proponent
of this account. And what I tried to say
is this, well, look, here's what could actually do
it. When people are indoctrinated, It's true that they
don't just come to believe a view and then
they forget it the next day or immediately change
their view upon being presented with counter-evidence, but there's
something about the way that they acquired it that
preempts them from doing that. For example, they are
taught that the critics are not trustworthy. They're taught
that the alternatives to their views are completely misleading,
right? They're not based on Um, they're not based
on, um, evidence, um, from reliable sources, um, that
they are maybe even sourced, uh, in bad actors
who have, um, nefarious intentions, uh, and so on.
So that when the pupil goes out into the
world, so to speak, and encounters criticism, they'll be
apt to dismiss those. Dismiss the critics, dismiss the
counter-evidence, dismiss the counterarguments as, as misleading. So then,
what's doing the explanatory work here is something like.
There's a feature of the instruction which gets the
agent to be closed-minded. It gets the agent to
dismiss the, the alternatives to their views. It gets
them to not consider those views seriously. If they
do consider them, they're not doing it in a
serious way. They're doing it just to Uh, just
to disparage or just to say, look, I'm Look,
you're wrong. I'm not, not interacting with you further,
right? So then, once we fill out the rationality
bypassing view, it ends up becoming a, uh, a
kind of closed-mindedness view. It becomes part of the
other family, right? Where a necessary element of indoctrination
is that the, the pupil. Comes to have a
closed-minded attitude or disposition or posture towards what they
were taught as true. Right? So the idea then
is that to the extent that you're attracted to
this rationality bypassing view, once we kind of fill
out the details properly, it ends up becoming a,
uh, a member of a, of a, of another
family of views, namely the closed-minded, where closed-mindedness as
an attitude or posture, disposition, um, is a central,
a central element of what makes, uh, something indoctrinatory.
Right. And so, I mean, your view is a
close-mindedness kind of view as well, or?
Yeah, it is. So, um, what I tried to
do is say, look, there's a, the lesson of
this rationality bypassing view is that We have to
have something which accounts for the stability of the
agent's belief over time, such that they don't consider.
Um, COUNTER-EVIDENCE, counterreasons, counterarguments, they don't consider the critics
seriously. OK, so having this closed-mindedness, this closed-minded posture
is what could do this, uh, realistically. Um, OK,
so we do need this closed-mindedness element, but just
getting a belief and Having this closed mindedness posture
towards the belief. IS not thereby sufficient for indoctrination
because you could have got this closed-minded attitude towards
the belief in a way that is completely independent
of how you got the belief in the first
place. So you can imagine like there's one stream,
one stream that leads you to believe, say, God
exists. And then another stream that leads you to
leads, leads you to be close-minded with respect to
the belief that God exists, so that you don't
consider counterarguments or the critics seriously. So, these two
streams can be independent of each other, and I
wanted to say that because they can be independent,
It won't always be, there won't always be a
1 to 1 match between someone who Um, is
taught to believe that something is true and is
closed-minded about whether or not it's true, that, that
they have to be paired together so that, you
know, there's something, say, that the educator, that the
teacher does, which not only leads the pupil to
believe that, say, God exists, but leads them to
be closed-minded with respect to whether God exists or
not. So, So in that respect then it, it's
not just. It's, it's not just that, um, getting
a belief, coming to believe that P and becoming
closed-minded about whether P, some belief that P is
sufficient for indoctrination, but it is necessary for it.
And so, OK, what would make, what do we
have to add then? Well, As I was hinting
at, it has to be sourced um in something
that I guess the instructor does, right? So the
instructor has to The reason why the pupil is
closed-minded about, say, whether God exists. It's because maybe
the teacher has said repeatedly that, look, I mean,
the critics, they are really misguided, um, they, they
have really, you know, untrustworthy sources, so, um, also,
you know, maybe he says, look, these people are
also, um, They're agents of the enemy, right? They
can't be trusted also because they are out to
get you, right? They want to recruit you into
their own, um, nefarious, like to towards their own
nefarious ends, you, you know, so imagining kind of
like a fundamentalist teacher here who says that the
critics are all, you know, agents of, of the
devil or something like that, right? So, This kind
of gives the students like pretty strong practical reasons
given their situation not to engage seriously with the
critics because they think if they were to do
so. You know, they would be in company with.
You know, the evil enemy, right? Um, AND Yeah,
they have that practical reason. There's also certain social
reasons, you know, like being ostracized or being told
off by your teacher, being punished. Um, SO different
kinds of practical considerations can come into play here
to preempt a student from considering. The critics and
the counter-evidence seriously, right? It's not just, it's not
just epistemological considerations, it's also practical considerations. That's important.
So I call all this rationally preemptive features of
the instruction. It's things that if you're a rational
person, person would give you a reason not to
engage seriously. And both epistemic and practical, practical considerations
can do this, right? Like if I get told
by someone who, um, you know, I have good
reason to think we'll follow up on what they're
saying that I'll be severely punished if I talk
to the critics, well, now I have a good
reason not to. You know, um, so. Uh, SO
yeah, so this is this rationally preemptive content or
instruction. I, I, I talked about in the book.
So that's one way to link the closed-minded attitude
back to the relevant belief forming process, the way
the teacher taught them, what the teacher taught them.
Um, BUT I found in the book that actually
this isn't enough because sometimes the. It need not
come down to what the teacher does, but how
the The relevant social environment kind of scaffolds this
um. These sort of like rational preemptters of the
critics of the counter-evidence and so on. So, it
might be that the teacher has all of the
best intentions and maybe even wants the students to
You know, maybe this is like kind of like
a It might be um the let's imagine the
teacher is sort of like a liberal progressive, um.
Uh, Christian, um, believer, um, they have very firm
convictions, um, and they're working at a fundamentalist, a
more fundamentalist kind of school, right? So, what they
try to do is not just Openly say things
like, look, you know, maybe the fundamentalist doctrines themselves
aren't true, but they do things like, well, let's,
um, you know, let's order some books that are
scholarly and are kind of critical from a theological
perspective of these doctrines, so that if the fundamentalist
perspective is the right one, we can kind of
get more, you know, solid reasons for thinking this.
Um, SO imagine the, the, the teacher tries to
order such books, but the, you know, the principal
of the school board say, nope, you can't do
that, right? Um, IMAGINE he then, you know, tries
to take them to the local, I mean, this
is getting fictional now, but imagine he takes them
to the local, you know, like community college library
or something like that, but they just, in fact,
are funded by fundamentalists and so it's kind of
stacked with mostly fundamentalists supporting literature, not really literature
that's critical of it, right? So, so even that
is a failure in this case. Maybe he tries
to get some guest speakers, but all the guest
speakers that get approved are ones who are more
on, you know, more sympathetic towards fundamentalism. So, basically,
all of the teacher's efforts to kind of inspire
a more open-minded disposition towards fundamentalist views. So he's
definitely teaching them that these fundamentalist doctrines are, you
know, the ones that they ought to believe, but
he's trying to inspire them to be open-minded about
it and Yet all of his efforts of trying
to secure this open-mindedness fail because of the overarching
educational system and social epistemic community surrounding, uh, these
views, right? So basically, You can also get indoctrination,
um, Of of the kind I'm thinking about. Um,
WHERE the social environment sort of picks up the
slack, where the teachers, you know, themselves, um, is
not, is not, he, he going, is not sort
of doing things that go towards making his students,
um, closed-minded, right? The, the sort of system can
facilitate that process of making the students, uh, closed-minded,
so that, you know, the students might come out
thinking like, well, you know, We got some guest
speakers. We got some scholarly books, and, you know,
they all kind of gave us the reasons why
the non-fundamentalist interpretations of this theology is, or why
all of that is bunk. So they come out,
you know, kind of like with better reasons than
when they started, and you could say like reasons
not to be open-minded about their positions, right? They'll
have kind of considered reasons for dismissing the opposition.
Um, SO this is an example that I adapted
from. Uh, Yeah, um, a philosopher of education named,
uh, Rebecca M. Taylor, who kind of works through
this view. As Highlighting the way in which the
systems can also play a role in making students
closed-minded, not just the educator, um, his or herself.
And I went a little, I went a step
further and, and argued that like, well, the educator
can almost entirely drop out of the picture in,
in certain instances where As long as you have
a source of the belief, maybe it even comes,
you know, online through YouTube or, or, you know,
message boards or things like that, they get kind
of positive presentations of a, of a view or
perspective, and then their surrounding social environment, including the
digital environment, preempts them from considering the relevant alternatives
to that view seriously. So that there needn't even
be a kind of Teacher-student relationship in this kind
of traditional, uh, traditional form, right? You're imagining like
a bunch of students in a classroom or something.
Um, Yeah, so Just to close out my answer
to this question then, um, What makes um a
way of being a a a, a kind of
instruction um indoctrinatory is that You have to, you
have to have uh an instruction which is aimed
at the, the students or pupils, the recipients. Believing
that something is the case, and then having a
closed-minded posture uh towards what it is that they
believe, where that means they don't consider the alternatives
to that belief, um. They don't consider it seriously,
right, so they'll ignore it or dismiss it or
think it's, uh, wrong and misleading. Um, AND that
very disposition, posture, way of thinking has to be
rooted in something. Explanatorily significant. So, if not the
teachers in directives, then in the way in which
the social, uh, the, the pupil's social environment is
structured, so as to support. That closed-minded posture, just
like in the example from before with the With
the, the teacher of the fundamentalist school who wants
the students to be open-minded about their fundamentalist doctrines,
but the social environment kind of reinforces. Um, BEING
closed-minded towards it. So it has to be rooted
in, in, in, in something that is, you know,
causally explanatorily salient with respect to their Closed-minded attitude.
Mhm. OK, so, uh, I mean, I, uh, I
have a few more questions I'd like to ask
you. I would like to ask you also to
please try to be a little bit more succinct
because we're already at, at an hour of recording
and I would like to go through at least
a few more questions. So, is indoctrinated belief epistemically
harmful and if it's harmful, uh, what makes it
so?
Yeah, that's great. Um, YEAH, so this is effectively
the second main question of the book. So the
first one is, what, we just went over, what
is indoctrination. Um, NOW, OK, what, if anything, makes
it harmful? OK, so, I have a certain kind
of harm um in mind here. So if indoctrination
is most fundamentally a way of getting people to
A way of getting people to believe. Um, THEN
we need to look at this from an epistemological
point of view. So, like, what's bad about believing
or getting beliefs and holding beliefs in this way.
So, if what I said is right, then indoctrination
is fundamentally a way of coming to believe something
and to believing it in a closed-minded way, owing
to the, I guess you could say, kind of
closed-minded making intentions of the, of the teacher or
The, the closed-minded making conditions of the, the pupil's
uh social environment. OK. So what's harmful then about
that from, from an epistemological point of view? Well,
It seems like The, it seems like indoctrination can
lead still to true beliefs, even on my own
view, right? So, it just involves being taught something
and being closed-minded towards it. Um, WHERE that's rooted
in the relevant, um, social epistemic structure or, or,
or the teacher. Um, OK, but that could still
result in true beliefs. So, insofar as it does
result in true beliefs, it's also gonna result in,
um, dismissing false beliefs, namely the contrary views to
one's own doctrine or position. And so, from that
perspective, it'll seem epistemically beneficial, right? Because, um, Not
only will you learn what's true, you'll also be
disposed not to consider the contrary false views seriously,
which is, you might think, epistemically beneficial because um
it'll preempt you from revising a true belief and
replacing it with a false belief. It'll um prevent
you from falling for misleading evidence. Uh, FOR example,
or merely persuasive counterarguments that are ultimately misleading. So,
when the beliefs are true, it seems like indoctrination
will be beneficial. Um, And I argue that, yes,
that's right. So, actually, it'll turn out that some
cases of indoctrination will be epistemically beneficial um because
it will lead to true beliefs and to the
protection of those true beliefs. And that is From
an epistemological point of view, beneficial because part of
the, one of the primary goals, epistemic goals is
to believe what's true and not believe what's false,
right? Um, OK. So, if you then take, if
you, if you think that, OK, then this fully
explains. Um This kind of fully explains what's going
on with respect to indoctrination when it comes to
epistemic benefits, goods. Uh, HARMS and wrongs, then. It'll
just turn out that indoctrination is only sometimes epistemically
wrong, right? If it results in false beliefs, it's
wrong. If it doesn't, then it's not. I call
that the veritistic view. So it'll say indoctrination is
only sometimes epistemically harmful or wrong. Um, Against this
view, there'll be proponents of what I call in
the book, the virtue view, which say like, well,
look, An aim of education isn't just to get
true beliefs and knowledge, um, and to, you know,
stab off ignorance, but it's also to develop as
a virtuous thinker, and open-mindedness is one of the
virtues, one of the intellectual virtues. So, since indoctrination
fundamentally opposes Open-mindedness, right? It's part of the very
nature of indoctrination that it opposes this, then it
will facilitate. Vicious, intellectually vicious thinking, right? By just
by its nature. Um, OK, so, I was thinking
of the virtue of you then is the main
rival, but. Um, I also found that once we
try to, you know, unravel this position, um, It
It either kind of collapses into a version of
the veritistic view, or it leads to the position
I end up endorsing, which I call the epistemic
respect view. And epistemic respect view basically says that
Well, what's bad about, what makes indoctrination wrong is
that it disrespects the learner in their capacity as
an epistemic agent, as someone who has epistemic values
that they can um prioritize, that they can choose
to prioritize or not to prioritize. Um, THAT has
certain, um, values that they, um, care about, uh,
from an epistemic point of view. Um, SO, let
me just go over this virtue view then real
quick. So, mhm. On the one hand, one way
of thinking about intellectual or epistemic virtues is that
there are ways of thinking, character traits, and dispositions
that are conducive towards knowledge and true belief, right?
So, the thought is, is that Intellectual humility counts
as a virtue insofar as it leads, it's conducive
to true belief and knowledge, and otherwise it's not.
Similarly, open-mindedness counts as a virtue if it tends
to lead you to true beliefs and to ignore
false beliefs, right? OK, well, on this understanding of
what a virtue is, then it'll closely align with
the veritistic view because then. Getting people to be
closed-minded, um, when they are believing a true view,
so they're indoctrinated, and thus they believe P and
they are closed-minded with, with respect to the relevant
alternatives to P. Um, That will count as an
instance of intellectual vice if in fact, the belief
is false or prone to lead them to other
false beliefs as well. But if we suppose that
that's not true, that it's a true belief, and
thus they're gonna ignore the contrary false view, so
you can just fill it in with whatever view,
you know, views you think are actually true, right?
So the theists can put in their favored. You
know, they can put in God exists, and then
their favored theology, and then the, the atheists can
put in God does not exist, and then their
favored um worldview, maybe, you know, a more humanistic,
um, scientific worldview, for example. OK, so, one of
them then will end up being virtuous, while the
other is vicious, cause one is sort of Protecting,
um, a belief that is true and is conducive
to other true beliefs and the other is not
doing that. Um, SO it ends up corresponding, this
virtue view will end up corresponding to the veritistic
view. It's really a, you know, a distinction without
a difference. Um, OK, so, in order to get
around this, you have to defend the virtue view
in a different way. Now, you're like saying like,
well, the virtues aren't so tightly connected to what's
true or what's actually true or false. It's more
about what enables the agent. We should think about
intellectual virtues in terms of what enables the learner.
The agent to sort of flourish um as a,
you know, as an intellectual creature, right? And so
on this view, there's just something good about being
open-minded vis a vis your flourishing as a human
being, right? So, on the one hand, um, I'm
somewhat attracted to this, to this view. Um, FOR
others, it'll strike them as mysterious, like, what is
it exactly that makes just being open-minded, say, good
for you. Um, YOUR flourishing as an, as a
human being or more specifically as an epistemic agent,
as an, as an intellectual creature. Um, WHY is
it an excellence of, of intellectual character exactly, if
it's not really connected to truth. Um So, um,
yeah, I took this to sort of move us
more towards my own position, which is this epistemic
respect and, and, and so that's to say like,
well, it's because if you sort of do something
which turns off the person's open-mindedness, and, and for
that matter, other prospective intellectual virtues, It seems like
you're doing something disrespectful to them, right? Like this
is something that you just need to respect, you
need to honor their capacity um for, for acquiring
these postures, these character traits, these ways of thinking,
even if it puts them at risk of believing
what's false, right? So, basically, epistemic respect requires that
we um That we let people make mistakes, even
deep mistakes. Right? And so, it will turn out
then that what indoctrination is doing by leading people
to not only have beliefs, but to be closed-minded
about those beliefs is that it's effectively saying, look,
we can't risk, you know, the indoctrinate with all
the best intentions in the world, who's leading his
pupils to true beliefs and to be close-minded about
the rivals, which are, in fact, we're imagining here,
false and misleading. Um, HE'S basically not trusting them
to get things wrong, to not figure things out,
uh, on their own, to not make mistakes. Right?
And I, I see that as a kind of
intellectual disrespect, right? It's not respecting that learner in
their capacity as a learner or more broadly as
a, as an epistemic agent. So, um, one element
of it is that it's sort of hindering our
inquisitive nature, which I, I see as a fundamental
part of what makes us human. We're naturally curious,
inquisitive beings, and we start off that way extremely
early on, right? Um, AS a parent, I feel
like now I can say this with like some
authority, right? That, that children are extremely curious, right?
They're naturally curious and A lot of what we
do as parents even is we, you know, sort
of, we sort of silence their curiosity, uh, sometimes.
And, and this is part of the danger of
indoctrination, I think, right? Part of what people are
worried about is like, well, when we start putting
them in different kinds of social and educational systems,
we're effectively silencing. The, the, the child, the adolescent,
and then later the adult's inquisitive nature, right? Um,
AND that, that seems disrespectful, um. So, that's the
answer. So you could say, yeah, what, what makes
that, what makes disrespect so bad? Well, I just
take it as bedrock, you know, so at some
point, explanation has to come to an end and
you just have sort of basic intuitions about Uh,
what's right or wrong, and yeah, it seems to
me that, well, From a fasci at least. You
know, you shouldn't be, you shouldn't disrespect, uh, you
shouldn't be disrespectful, uh, towards people. That's something that
you shouldn't do. Um, OF course, you can sometimes
get over, overriding reasons, you know, I'm not saying
that. This disrespect always trumps any consideration, right? Of
course not. Almost nothing is like that. Um, BUT
that it's one that normally needs to be respected,
that normally speaking, just the risk of getting a
false belief as such, um, is not good enough,
uh, for, for implementing what, you know, truthful or
elitic indoctrination, right? OK, yeah, so I hope that,
yeah, it gets the Answers the the question adequately.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, sure. So let me just
ask you about a particular kind of example that
people nowadays debate a lot when it comes to
accusing other people of indoctrination or trying to come
up with examples of indoctrination. So do you think
that Uh, right-wing people in the US are right
to charge teachers and schools of indoctrination if and
when they teach about topics like Marxism, socialism, or
what they consider to be woke.
Yeah, that's a great question. Um, IT'S something that
I deal with a lot in the book. The,
the last chapter is all about. It's all about
this and the function of indoctrination charges, so. On
the one hand, I think that, you know, if
it really is the case that There's teachers in
schools and in universities that are. Leading students to
believe, you know, Marxist views or let's, you know,
let's go very broad and we'll just say like
woke doctrines or whatever. That, yeah, I mean, on
my account, it would follow that this is. Not
good, right? But it, it would follow no matter
what the views were, right? Um, SO it, it
could be that Marxism is actually correct and that
the lots of the woke positions are themselves actually
correct, but on my view, it would follow that
insofar as someone is indoctrinating people to believe Marxist
views or Very broadly speaking, you know, so-called woke
doctrines, then this would be epistemically wrongful, um. OK,
so That's already a difference between what my account
predicts and maybe what the right-wing politicians are doing,
because I take it that the right-wing politicians. Part
of their problem. WITH, with these views is, is,
is this, they, they also think they're not true.
Right, so it's, it's no accident that of course
they're picking on, um, views that are radically at
odds with their own, right? So if you were
to imagine. That university educators were and teachers in
schools were, you know, teaching. Claims from the Bible
as literal truths or as teaching. You know, I
was going to say, you know, claims about republican
democracy, um, as being, you know, accurate, then they'd
be happy with this, but now, you know, as,
as it, as it happens, many on the right
are not so keen on Uh, democracy. So, but
anyway, the point still stands, which is just that
if you kind of picked their own favored. Ideological
positions. It's not clear to me that they actually
would call out for the end of indoctrination, or
that they would even. Qualify the instruction as indoctrination,
right? So this was, this is part of the
worry in the book that The claims Um, are
not really functioning to describe a worry about indoctrination
as such. It's really about the Instruction or even
for that matter, exposure to. Things like Marxism and
you know. Different views about uh gender. Uh, FOR
example, right, so, yeah, so I guess the idea
here is this, is that I, I actually don't
see their concern as actually about indoctrination, and in
fact I don't think it's tracking indoctrination at all.
So if you go and look at the laws
that have been written so far in the US
and I covered this in the book, you don't
actually see definitions of indoctrination in the laws, right?
So that means that it's kind of like a
It's free to be filled in, however, you know,
accusers and maybe judges see fit, right? The, the
relevant evaluators, right? So that's, that's one problem. Um,
ANOTHER problem is that in the laws, they specifically
target. So-called Marxist and woke doctrines, sometimes under the
guise of being woke doctrines, right? So they'll say,
they'll say things like woke doctrines at odds with
um American values, right? But of course, that builds
in a lot, like, first, what are the American
values? Second, are the relevant views actually at odds
with whatever qualifies as American values? And third, Even
if all of that is true, is it really
the case that their students are being indoctrinated or
are they just being exposed to these positions? Um,
OR are they just being taught that these positions
are 11, you know, one among many that might
be true, but there's rivals out there that also
might be true. So was that when I was
writing the book, I actually couldn't find that much
evidence that indoctrination as such was taking place rather
than just instruction of what is in fact or
what they think of as Marxist positions or woke
positions. And even in that evidence. There wasn't really
anything going for it being indoctrinated versus just being
taught in, in the sense of being exposed to,
right? So if you Um, You know, if you
take, say, a political science course or political theory
course rather, that is explicitly about Marxism, then yeah,
probably the, the teacher will be partial towards Marxism,
but In my own experience as a, you know,
every, every professor was once, was, was once a
student, right? I mean, in my experience, they, even
people that are partial towards the view still present
the relevant alternatives to the view. And even if
that particular educator isn't especially Good at Exposing the
students to the counterarguments in their most favorable light.
It's not the case that the university is prohibitive
of this. I mean, the university libraries, you know,
will You know, doubtless carry all, uh, you know,
all, most of the relevant literature that, that will
compose the counterarguments, um. And students in, in my
experience have not been. Prevented from having open discussions,
right? Um, OF course, what has been prevented are
things like Having certain Speakers that are platformed at
a university, right, um, but that's a diff, but
that's different from preventing students from openly discussing these
views or seeking out evidence, uh, for or against
the views through, um, the university structure, right? So
the long and short of it is that I
couldn't actually find any clear evidence of Indoctrination taking
place. The evidence I did find that would lit
name indoctrination as occurring was, was far too partisan.
So it was coming from someone who Was themselves,
if not a right wing politician, then. Um, LIKE
a right wing pundit, uh, or someone writing for
a. Right-wing, um, you know, like online magazine or,
or, or newspaper, uh, for example, so that it's
coming from a highly partisan perspective so that Yeah,
it, it could be evidence, um, but it's not,
it's not gonna be uncontroversial evidence, right? Um, SO
that's the, that's the issue there. So yeah, I
would say to, yeah, everyone, we have to actually
be quite skeptical about whether any of, any indoctrination
is really occurring. I'm sure some actually is just
given the chance, you know, just given chances, but
I think that it's Rather, mostly a moral panic,
right? And so, And, and, in the book, I
tried to argue that because Mainly the right, not
exclusively, but mainly because the right are using charges
of indoctrination in a propaganda way, and by that
I mean they're using them in a way that
is Independent of the evidence, right? So even if
there were good evidence that indoctrination was occurring, they
would still be motivated to, to Attribute indoctrination to
the relevant targets in just the same way regardless.
And that's because the function of the of their
attributions, their charges of indoctrination is really to serve,
you know, a, a deeper political and ideological agenda,
which is to kind of get Their voters and
prospective voters to fear. To have this moral panic
about education and the university, thus going towards the
agenda of defunding public universities, of defunding public schools,
having more vouchers for private, specifically religious, the, uh,
religiously oriented education, and also specifically here again, of
course, Christian ones, right, um, or at least Judeo-Christian
ones, so. It's, uh, the evidence speaks more in
favor of that's the function of indoctrination charges in
contemporary, the, you know, contemporary politics in the US
and, and also for that matter, in certain parts
of Western Europe. Um, AND the epistemic harm here?
Is that it kind of pollutes the environment for
educators and students, so then students and educators are
not going to. Um, HAVE a good, have an
easy time identifying. You know, when indoctrination is occurring
and when it isn't, right, so the idea is
that when you have too many ringers, too many
false instances, too many propaganda claims in your environment,
um, you're always gonna be worried about is someone
crying wolf, right? Um, SO I think that the
danger here is not, you know, we can bracket
the political stuff and just say like, well, there's
an epistemic issue here, right, which is that These
politicians are perhaps inadvertently making it so that the
relevant people, the teachers and the students are not
going to be able to trust each other when
it comes to their charges of indoctrination, and that's
a bad thing because we actually do want to
prevent actual instances of indoctrination, right, right.
OK, great.
So,
do you think that there are instances where indoctrination
might be necessary, and avoidable, or even good in
terms of epistemic goods like uh true belief or
knowledge?
Yeah, it's a great question. Um, I deal with
this a bit in the book, um, especially in
the chapter on the ethics of indoctrinated belief. Um,
So, because indoctrination involves epistemic uh disrespect, it, there
will always be a presumption against indoctrination, but, yeah,
as you're, as you were sort of hinting at,
um, it won't always override. You know, the relevant
considerations, so. I think that if a person is
in a particularly. Noxious environment where there's just lots
of false beliefs that are widely spread and endorsed
and the The sort of sources of evidence are
all extremely messy and are mostly propagating false views
and misleading evidence, then if the most effective thing
you can do as say a parent or a
mentor or a teacher. IS to would be to
try to protect the, you know, the child or
the pupil or the student. You know, it could
be different levels. Students can also be full-blown adults,
of course, um, would be to do something to
protect them, um, from acquiring. All these false positions
and misleading evidence, right? Um. So, you know, imagine
a scenario where. There's, let's say a. A cult
community, right, and a and children are born and
raised in this cult community and the cult has
very. HAS, you know, definitely false positions and they
kind of manufacture false evidence in favor of these
false positions and they organize the community so that
it's extremely difficult for outsiders to get in and
for insiders to get out. Outside critical information is,
you know, doesn't really make its way in. It's
always screened so that it, or rewritten to be
favorable. Um, SO that someone who grows up in
this environment, you know, what they're taught as being
true will just really seem true, right? It's corroborated
by everyone they trust, um, you know, all the
way down the hierarchy to corroboration by their peers,
and it's just part of their way of life,
right? But imagine there's maybe like a rogue. Um,
PARENT or teacher in this community who is sort
of fairly secretly. Um, PRESENTING critical information, you know,
views and arguments that are critical of the cult
group's core beliefs and You know, let's say that
this, this person is indoctrinated. Let's imagine that that's
the case. Let's imagine he's indoctrinating them according to
the definition, that is, he gets them to believe
these views. Um, HE leads them, he instructs them
so that they ought to believe the views. And
he also directs them to look, I know that
in this community, you're going to find just about
everyone who corroborates. The opposite, who will say the
other, the critics are misleading or that they won't
even, they'll say, don't even consider the critics, right?
It's too dangerous. Well, you know, I'm here to
say that they're wrong. Well, imagine that this person
is successful with some of the pupils, right? And
they go on to be closed-minded with respect to
their views they silently hold. They don't, you know,
make it known to others that they hold them.
Well, I think in this environment, it could actually
be, uh, um, it's definitely epistemically beneficial trivially because
they acquired true beliefs and are thus, you know,
kind of ignoring or not considering any longer the
false beliefs. Um, IT is still epistemically, um, well,
there's still, it's still prima facie epistemically wrongful because
it is in some sense still disrespectful, um, because,
you know, learners need to be Able to make
deep mistakes, even, right? And it would be disrespectful
to kind of select the relevant epistemic values on
behalf of the learners, um, rather than letting them
discover that, discover what values they're going to prioritize
for themselves. Um, BUT given how noxious their environment
is, um, It might be all things considered better
to still do this, um. Especially if what's part
of the not considering. ESPECIALLY if what's part of
the cult's beliefs are that the outsiders are like,
you know, not just wrong, like kind of factually
wrong, but there are maybe, you know, if it's,
if it's part of it that the critics are
evil and in the service of injustice and, and
that you would be tarnished forever by so much
as considering their position seriously and associating with them
on any level, then You know, obviously teaching the
contrary to this, uh, could be quite beneficial for
people who managed to make their way out, right?
Um, SO, So yeah, so I sort of think
that there, there can, you know, we can imagine,
we can construct cases where indoctrination is all things
considered better than the alternatives, but there's still a
presumption against it. Mhm.
So let me just ask you one last question
then. Can indoctrination be countered and should it be
countered?
Yeah, um, I think it should be, um, countered,
of course, and I mean, you know, it's a
prediction of my own theory that it ought to
be because if it fundamentally involves Um, epistemic disrespect,
that is disrespect, uh, towards the learner in their
capacity as an epistemic agent or, you know, someone
who wants to thrive as an intellectual being. Yeah,
then, then that suggests that we ought to try
to counter indoctrination, you know, where, when we really
find it. Um, OK, so, part of the worry
I had though in the book is that even
though this follows on from my own views, given
how Given that The way the term indoctrination tends
to get used in the public environment is so
propaganda, and even when it's not propaganda, it's at
least kind of Somewhat inflammatory, right? So it's kind
of. It's enlisted to. Not just describe a particular
kind of teaching, but to evaluate it, right? Um,
SO, It, it'll be difficult to identify the cases
to work on, right? To kind of like, oh,
let's look into this and Um, see what, what
can be done. I think what you can do
on a kind of sys system level is to
think about the aims of education and to think
about how the aims of education can be supported,
but also hampered by the person's social environment. So
this means you won't necessarily have A very, you
know, it kind of recommends not a very top
down. Uh, PROCEDURE, but more of a bottom-up procedure
because it might be that. Thinking about the school
case, you know, for a moment. Elementary schools placed
in environments where. There's lots of access to information.
Maybe they're in university towns, there's well-funded public libraries.
People, parents tend to be on the Upper ends
of the socioeconomic scale, you know, they're having white
collar jobs, they're lawyers, pro, you know. Work, maybe
they work at a university, they're, they're dentists, they're
doctors, they're, you know, uh, software engineers, things like
this. Um Those tend to correlate with people that,
you know, value education, have higher, have higher education
credentials. Maybe they read, they expose their children to
art and museums and books and, and so on
and so forth, right? So, they go on trips.
Um, SO, in these sorts of environments, I think,
Yeah, you don't have to worry about indoctrination so
much because even if it were occurring at the
sort of school level, there's kind of like enough
scaffolding for anti-indoctrination in their social epistemic environment as
it is. Um, WHEREAS if you go into a
community which lacks this kind of these social epistemic
resources. It, you have to, you have to kind
of like pack more into the educational system, I
think, so that it will be. So the educational
system will will be. TAILORED more to the development
of the peoples as thinkers, as, um, you know,
intellectually, um, humble, as critical, as open-minded, um, as
intellectually thorough, as sensitive to the, sensitive to the
evidence, um, sensitive to reasons and argumentation, and so
on and so forth. So, Um, In that case,
you, you have to think more about. The aims
of education is not being towards knowledge and truth
per se, but more towards. The development of the
students as thinkers. Um, WHERE that is the prime
directive, as it were, um. Whereas um in other
environments, I don't think you have to give that
as much attention because. Their, their, their independent social
epistemic environment can kind of do the anti-indoctrinory work
where the school system fails to prioritize that. So,
yeah, I mean, my broad recommendation then is something
like a bottom-up approach where that means you have
to look at particular school systems, particular educational environments,
and what the What the values and. Social resources
are in those communities, right? Um, SO there's not
like a one size fits all, um, directive here,
right? It's actually much more messy and it'll involve
Um, yeah, it'll, it'll involve the educational system as
much as the parents, the teachers, other people in
the community, and so on, right? Yeah.
Great. So, the book is again the philosophy of
indoctrination, epistemology, ethics and Politics. There it is, the
physical, a physical copy. So, Doctor Ralli, thank you
so much for taking the time to come on
the show. Would you just like to tell people
where they can find your work on the internet?
Yeah, absolutely. Um, THANK you so much, Ricardo. This
has been wonderful. I'm happy to Have some broadcasting
for this book. Um, SO yeah, you can find
this book, um, at Routledge, that's the publisher website.
You can also find it in select bookstores, of
course, also on Amazon. Um, YOU can download the
first chapter for free on my, on my own
website so that if you see whether or not
you're interested, Um, you can usually find me just
by Googling my, my, my name, which is Chris
or Christopher Rinalli, um. And then go to my
academic website, and there you can also find some
of the other stuff that I'm working on. Um,
AND I also have a free Piece on indoctrination
with 1000 word philosophy, so it's only 1000 words,
which is very, very short, and this is like
a kind of a helpful introduction, um, also for
educators on uh what indoctrination is and what um
is prospectively wrong with it. So you can also
check that out out, check that out at 1000
word philosophy.com. Um, YEAH, and thank you so much.
Uh, I hope listeners, uh, got something or learned
something, uh, from this, and, um, interested to hear
what, yeah, all of you think, think about these
views, where I go right, where I go wrong.
I'm sure I go wrong in a lot of
places. Um, YEAH, so that's it for me. Thank
you so much. Yeah,
thank you so much. Thank you for taking the
time to come on the show, and it's been
a pleasure to talk with you.
Yeah, and you too. Thank you so much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.